IV. Chapter 7 
Chi-Izmachí is the name of the site of their town, where they were afterward and where they 
settled. There, under the fourth generation of kings, they developed their power and 
constructed buildings of mortar and stone.  
And Conaché and Beleheb-Queh, the Galel-Ahau, ruled. Then king Cotuhá and Iztayul 
reigned, as they were called the Ahpop and the Ahpop-Camhá, who reigned there in Izmachí, 
which was the beautiful city which they had built.  
Only three great houses were there in Izmachí. There were not twenty-four great houses then, 
only their three great houses, only a great house of the Cavec, only a great house of the 
Nihaib, and only one of the people of Ahau-Quiché. Only two had great houses, the two 
branches of the family [the Quiché and the Tamub]. 
And there they were in Izmachí with only one thought, without disputes or difficulties, 
peaceful was the kingdom, they had no quarrels nor disputes, in their hearts were only peace 
and happiness. They were not envious nor jealous. Their grandeur was limited, they had not 
thought of aggrandizing themselves, nor of expanding. When they tried to do it, they fastened 
the shield there in Izmachí but only to give a sign of their empire, as a symbol of their power 
and a symbol of their greatness. 
Seeing this, the people of Ilocab began the war; they wanted to kill King Cotuhá, wishing to 
have a chief of their own. And as for Lord Iztayul, they wanted to punish him, that he be 
punished and killed by those of Ilocab. But their evil plans against King Cotuhá did not 
succeed, for he fell upon them before the people of Ilocab were able to kill him. 
This, then, was the beginning of the revolution and the dissensions of the war. First they 
attacked the town, and the warriors came. And what they wanted was to ruin the Quiché race; 
they wanted to reign alone. But they only came to die; they were captured and fell into 
captivity, and few among them succeeded in escaping. 
Immediately afterward the sacrifices began; the people of Ilocab were sacrificed before the 
god, and this was the punishment for their sins by order of King Cotuhá. Many also fell into 
slavery and servitude; they only went to give themselves up to be overcome because of having 
arranged the war against the lords and against the town. The destruction and ruin of the 
Quiché race and their king was what they wished, but they did not succeed in accomplishing 
it. 
In this way the sacrifice of men began before the gods, when the war of the shields broke out, 
which was the reason that they began the fortifications of the city of Izmachí. 
There began and originated their power, because the empire of the King of the Quiché was 
really large. They were in every sense marvelous kings; there was no one who could dominate 
them, neither was there anyone who could humble them. And at the same time they were the 
builders of the grandeur of the kingdom which they had founded there in Izmachí. 
There the fear of god waxed, they were inspired with awe, and the tribes large and small were 
filled with fear, for they saw the arrival of the captives, those who were sacrificed and killed 
because of the power and sovereignty of King Cotuhá, the King Iztayul, and the people of 
Nihaib and Ahau-Quiché. 
There were only three branches of the [Quiché] family there in Izmachí, as the town was 
called, and there they also began the feasts and orgies for their daughters when [suitors] came 
to ask for them in marriage. 
There the so-called three great houses gathered, and there they drank their drinks, there they 
also ate their food, which was the price of their sisters, the price of their daughters, and their 
hearts were joyful when they did it, and they ate and drank in the great houses. 
"In this way we show our gratitude, and thus we open the road for our posterity and our 
descendants, this is the demonstration of our consent to their becoming husbands and wives," 
they said. 
There they identified themselves, and there they took their names; they distributed themselves 
in clans in the seven principal tribes and in cantons.  
"Let us unite, we of the Cavec, we of the Nihaib, and we of the Ahau-Quiché," said the three 
clans, and the three great houses. For a long time they were there in Izmachí, until they found 
and saw another town, and abandoned that of Izmachí.
