IV. Chapter 8 
AFTER THEY HAD LEFT THERE, THEY CAME here to the town of Gumarcaah, as the 
Quiché named it when Kings Cotuhá and Gucumatz and all the lords came. There had then 
begun the fifth generation of men, since the beginning of civilization and of the population, 
the beginning of the existence of the nation. 
There, then, they built many houses and at the same time constructed the temple of God; in 
the center of the high part of the town they located it when they arrived and settled there. 
Then their empire grew. They were very numerous, when they held their council in their great 
houses. They reunited, but later divided, because dissensions had arisen and jealousies grew 
up amongst them over the price for their sisters and their daughters, and because they no 
longer drank together. 
This, then, was the reason why they divided and why they turned against each other, and they 
threw the skulls of the dead, they hurled them around among each other. 
Then they divided into nine families, and having ended the dispute over the sisters and the 
daughters, they carried out the plan of dividing the kingdom into twenty-four great houses, as 
they did. It is a long time since they came here to their town, and finished the twenty-four 
great houses, there 
in the City of Gumarcaah, which was blessed by the Bishop. Later the city was abandoned.  
There they increased, there they installed their splendid thrones and royal seats, and they 
distributed their honors among all the lords. The nine lords of Cavec formed nine families; the 
lords of Nihaib formed another nine; the lords of Ahau-Quiché formed another four; and the 
lords of Zaquic formed another two families. 
They became very numerous, and many also followed each of the lords; these were the first 
among their vassals, and each of the lords had large families.  
We shall tell now the names of the lords of each of the great houses. Here, then, are the names 
of the lords of Cavec. The first of the lords was Ahpop, [then] Ahpop-Camhá, Ah-Tohil, Ah-
Gucumatz, Nim-Chocoh-Cavec, Popol-Vinac-Chituy, Lolmet-Quehnay, Popol-Vinac Pa-Hom 
Tzalatz, and Uchuch-Camhá.  
These, then, were the lords of Cavec, nine lords, each one of which had his great house, which 
afterward will appear again. 
Here then are the lords of Nihaib. The first was Ahau-Galel, then Ahau-Ahtzic-Vinac, Galel-
Camhá, Nima-Camhá, Uchuch-Camhá, Nim-Chocoh-Nihaibab, Avilix, Yacolatam, Utzam-
pop-Zalclatol, and Nimá-Lolmet-Ycoltux, the nine lords of Nihaib.  
And as for those of Ahau-Quiché, these are the names of the lords: Ahtzic-Vinac, Ahau-
Lolmet, Ahau-Nim-Chocoh-Ahau, and Ahau-Hacavitz, four lords of Ahau-Quiché, in the 
order of their great houses. 
And the house of Zaquic had two families, the Lords Tzutuhá and Galel Zaquic. These two 
lords had only one great house.
