IV. Chapter 9 
In this way [the number] of the twenty-four lords was completed and the twenty-four great 
houses came into being. Thus the grandeur and power of the sons of the Quiché grew, when 
they built the town of the ravines out of stone and mortar.  
Then the small tribes and the great tribes came before the king. The Quiché increased when 
their glory and majesty waxed, when they raised the house of their gods and the house of their 
lords. But it was not they who worked, or constructed their houses either, or made the house 
of the gods, for they were [made] by their sons and vassals, who had multiplied. 
And they were not cheating them, nor robbing them, nor seizing them by force, because in 
reality each belonged to the lords, and many of their brothers and relatives had come together 
and had assembled, to hear the commands of each of the lords. 
The lords were really loved and great was their glory; and the sons and the vassals held the 
birthdays of the lords in great respect when the inhabitants of the country and the city 
multiplied.  
But it did not happen that all the tribes delivered themselves up, and neither did the country 
and towns [the inhabitants of them] fall in battle, but instead they increased, because of the 
marvels of the lords, King Gucumatz and King Cotuhá. Gucumatz was truly a marvelous 
king. For seven days he mounted to the skies and for seven days he went down into Xibalba; 
seven days he changed himself into a snake and really became a serpent; for seven days he 
changed himself into an eagle; for seven days he became a jaguar; and his appearance was 
really that of an eagle and a jaguar. Another seven days he changed himself into clotted blood 
and was only motionless blood. 
The nature of this king was really marvelous, and all the other lords were filled with terror 
before him. Tidings of the wonderful nature of the King were spread and all the lords of the 
towns heard it. And this was the beginning of the grandeur of the Quiché, when King 
Gucumatz gave these signs of his power. His sons and his grandsons never forgot him. And 
he did not do this in order to be an extraordinary king, he did it as a means of dominating all 
the towns, as a means of showing that only one was called upon to be chief of the people.  
The generation of the wonderful king called Gucumatz was the fourth generation, and 
Gucumatz was also the Ahpop and the Ahpop-Camhá. 
They left successors and descendants who reigned and ruled, and begot children, and did 
many things. Tepepul and Iztayul whose reign was the fifth generation of kings were 
begotten; and in the same way, each of the generations of these lords had succession.
