IV. Chapter 12 
Here, then, are the generations and the order of all the rulers which began with our first 
grandfathers and our first fathers, Balam-Quitzé, Balam-Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui-Balam, 
when the sun appeared, and the moon and the stars were seen. 
Now, then, we shall give the beginning of the generations, the order of kingdoms from the 
beginning of their lineage, how the lords entered into power, from their accessions to their 
deaths: [we shall give] each generation of lords and ancestors, as well as the lord of the town, 
all and each of the lords. Here, then, the person of each one of the lords of the Quiché shall be 
shown. 
Balam-Quitzé, the root of those of Cavec. 
Qocavib, second generation [of the line] of Balam-Quitzé.  
Balam-Conaché, with whom the title of Ahpop began, third generation.  
Cotuhá [I] and Iztayub, fourth generation.  
Gucumatz and Cotuhá, [II] first of the marvelous kings, who were of the fifth generation.  
Tepepul and Iztayul, of the sixth order.  
Quicab and Cavizimah, of the seventh order of succession to the kingdom.  
Tepepul and Iztayub, eighth generation. 
Tecum and Tepepul, ninth generation.  
Vahxaqui-Caam and Quicab, tenth generation of kings. 
Vucub-Noh and Cauutepech, eleventh order of kings.  
Oxib-Queh and Beleheb-Tzi, the twelfth generation of kings. These were those who reigned 
when Donadiú came, and who were hanged by the Spaniards.  
Tecum and Tepepul, who paid tribute to the Spaniards, they left sons, and the former were the 
thirteenth generation of kings.  
Don Juan de Rojas and don Juan Cortés, the fourteenth generation of kings, were the sons of 
Tecum and Tepepul. 
These are, then, the generations and the order of the kingdom of the lords Ahpop and Ahpop-
Camhá of the Quiché of Cavec. 
And now we shall name again the families. These are the Great Houses of each of the lords 
who followed the Ahpop and the Ahpop-Camhá. These are the names of the nine families of 
those of Cavec, of the nine Great Houses, and these are the titles of the lords of each one of 
the Great Houses: 
Ahau-Ahpop, one Great House. Cuhá was the name of this Great House. 
Ahau-Ahpop-Camhá, whose Great House was called Tziquinahá. 
Nim-Chocoh-Cavec, one Great House. 
Ahau-Ah-Tohil, one Great House. 
Ahau-Ah-Gucumatz, one Great House. 
Popol-Vinac Chituy, one Great House. 
Lolmet-Quehnay, one Great House. 
Popol-Vinac Pahom Tzalatz Xcuxebá, one Great House. 
Tepeu-Yaqui, one Great House. 
These, then, are the nine families of Cavec. And very numerous were the sons and vassals of 
the tribes which followed these nine Great Houses. 
Here are the nine Great Houses of those of Nihaib. But first we shall give the lineage of the 
rulers of the kingdom. From one root only these names originated when the sun began to 
shine, with the beginning of light. 
Balam-Acab, first grandfather and father. 
Qoacul and Qoacutec, second generation. 
Cochahuh and Cotzibahá, third generation. 
Beleheb-Queh [I], fourth generation. 
Cotuhá, [I] fifth generation of kings. 
Batza, sixth generation. 
Iztayul, seventh generation of kings. 
Cotuhá [II], eighth order of the kingdom. 
Beleheb-Queh [II], ninth order. 
Quemá, so called, tenth generation. 
Ahau-Cotuhá, eleventh generation. 
Don Cristóval, so called, who ruled in the time of the Spaniards. 
Don Pedro de Robles, the present Ahau-Galel. 
These, then, are all the kings who descended from the Ahau-Galel. Now we shall name the 
lords of each of the Great Houses. 
Ahau-Galel, first lord of the Nihaib, head of one Great House. 
Ahau-Ahtzic-Vinac, one Great House. 
Ahau-Galel-Camhá, one Great House. 
Nima-Camhá, one Great House. 
Uchuch-Camhá, one Great House. 
Nim-Chocoh-Nihaib, one Great House. 
Ahau-Avilix, one Great House. 
Yacolatam, one Great House.  
Nima-Lolmet-Ycoltux, one Great House. 
These, then, are the Great Houses of the Nihaib; these were the names of the nine families of 
those of Nihaib, as they were called. Numerous were the families of each one of the lords, 
whose names we have given first. 
Here, now, is the lineage of those of Ahau-Quiché, who were their grandfather and father. 
Mahucutah, the first man. 
Qoahau, name of the second generation of kings. 
Caglacán. 
Cocozom. 
Comahcún. 
Vucub-Ah. 
Cocamel. 
Coyabacoh. 
Vinac-Bam. 
These were the kings of those of the Ahau-Quiché; this is the order of their generations. 
Here now are the tides of the lords who made up the Great Houses; there were only four Great 
Houses. 
Ahtzic-Vinac-Ahau, title of the first lord, one Great House. 
Lolmet-Ahau, second lord, a Great House. 
Nim-Chocoh-Ahau, third lord, a Great House. 
Hacavitz, fourth lord, a Great House. 
Therefore, four were the Great Houses of the Ahau-Quiché. 
There were, then, three Nim-Chocoh, who were like fathers [vested with authority] of all the 
lords of the Quiché. The three Chocoh came together in order to make known the orders of 
the mothers, the orders of the fathers. Great was the position of the three Chocoh. There were, 
then, the Nim-Chocoh of those of Cavec, the Nim-Chocoh of those of Nihaib, who was 
second, and the Nim-Chocoh-Ahau of the Ahau-Quiché, who was third. Each one of the three 
Chocoh represented his family. 
And this was the life of the Quiché, because no longer can be seen [the book of the Popol 
Vuh] which the kings had in olden times, for it has disappeared. 
In this manner, then, all the people of the Quiché, which is called Santa Cruz, came to an end.
