III. Chapter 10 
And now we shall tell of their stay and abode there on the mountain, where the four called 
Balam-Quitzé, Balam-Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui-Balam were together. Their hearts mourned 
for Tohil, Avilix, and Hacavitz, whom they had placed among the air-plants and the moss. 
We shall tell now how they made the sacrifices at the foot of the place where they had carried 
Tohil, when they arrived in the presence of Tohil and Avilix. They went to see them, to greet 
them, and also to give them thanks for the arrival of the dawn. They were in the thicket amidst 
the stones, there in the woods. And only by magic art did they speak when the priests and 
sacrificers came before Tohil. They did not bring great gifts, only resin, the remains of the 
gum, called noh, and pericón, they burned before their gods. 
Then Tohil spoke; only by a miracle he gave counsel to the priests and sacrificers. And they 
[the gods] spoke and said: "Truly here shall be our mountains and our valleys. We are yours; 
great shall be our lory and numerous our descendents, through the work of all men. Yours are 
all the tribes and we, your companions. Care for your town, and we shall give you your 
learning. 
"Do not show us before the tribes when we are angered by the words of their mouths, or 
because of their conduct. Neither shall you permit us to fall into a snare. Give us, instead, the 
creatures of the woods and of the fields, and also the female deer, and the female birds. Come 
and give us a little of your blood, have pity upon us. You may have the skins of the deer and 
guard us from those whose eyes have deceived us.   
"So, then, [the skin of] the deer shall be our symbol which you shall show before the tribes. 
When they ask 'Where is Tohil?' show the deerskin before their eyes. Neither shall you show 
yourselves. for you shall have other things to do. Great shall be their position; you shall 
dominate all the tribes; you shall bring your blood and their substance before us, and those 
who come to embrace us, shall be ours also," thus spoke Tohil, Avilix, and Hacavitz.  
They had the appearance of youths, when those who came to offer gifts saw them. Then the 
persecution of the young of the birds and of the deer began, and the fruit of the chase was 
received by the priests and sacrificers. And when they found the young of the birds and the 
deer, they went at once to place the blood of the deer and of the birds in the mouths of the 
stones, that were Tohil and Avilix. 
As soon as the blood had been drunk by the gods, the stones spoke, when the priests and the 
sacrificers came, when they came to bring their offerings. And they did the same before their 
symbols, burning pericón and holom-ocox.  
The symbols of each one were there where they had been placed on the top of the mountain. 
But they [the priests] did not live in their houses by day, but walked over the mountains, and 
ate only the young horseflies, and the wasps, and the bees which they hunted; they had neither 
good food nor good drink. And neither were the roads from their homes known, nor did they 
know where their wives had remained.
