IV. Chapter 10 
Here are the names of the sixth generation of kings. There were two great kings, the first was 
called Gag-Quicab, and the other, Cavizimah, and they performed heroic deeds and 
aggrandized the Quiché; for surely they were of marvelous nature. 
Here is the destruction and division of the fields and the towns of the neighboring nations, 
small and large. Among them was that, which in olden times, was the country of the 
Cakchiquel, the present Chuvilá, and the country of the people of Rabinal, Pamacá, the 
country of the people of Caoqué, Zaccabahá and the towns of the peoples of Zaculeu, of 
Chuvi-Miquiná, Xelahuh, Chuva-Tzac, and Tzolohche.  
These [peoples] hated Quicab. He made war on them and certainly conquered and destroyed 
the fields and towns of the people of Rabinal, the Cakchiquel, and the people of Zaculeu; he 
came and conquered all the towns, and the soldiers of Quicab carried his arms to distant parts. 
One or two tribes did not bring tribute, and then he fell upon all the towns and they were 
forced to bring tribute to Quicab and Cavizimah. 
They were made slaves, they were wounded, and they were killed with arrows against the 
trees [to which they had been tied] and for them there was no longer any glory, they no longer 
had power. In this way came about the destruction of the towns, which were instantly razed to 
the ground. Like a flash of lightning which strikes and shatters the rock, so, in an instant were 
the conquered people filled with terror. 
Before Colché, as a symbol of a town destroyed by him, there is now a pile of stones, which 
look almost as if they had been cut With the edge of an ax. it is there on the coast, called 
Petatayub, and it may be clearly seen today by people who pass, as proof of the valor of 
Quicab. 
They could neither kill him nor overcome him, for, in truth, he was a brave man, and all the 
people rendered tribute unto him. 
And all the lords, having gathered in council, went to fortify the ravines and the towns, having 
conquered the towns of all the tribes. Then spies went out to observe the enemy and they 
founded something like towns in the occupied places. "Just in case by chance the tribes might 
return to occupy the town," they said, when they reassembled in council. 
Then they went out to [take up] their positions. "These shall be like our forts and our town, 
our walls and defenses, here shall our valor and our manhood be proved," said all the lords, 
when they went to take up the position assigned to each clan in order to fight the enemy. 
And having received their orders they went to the places that had been founded in the land of 
the tribes. "Go there, for now it is our land. Do not be afraid, if there are still enemies who 
come to kill you, come quickly and let me know, and I will go to kill them!" said Quicab, 
when he took leave of all of them in the presence of the Galel and the Ahtzic-Vinac.  
Then the bowmen and the slingers, as they were called, set out. Then the grandfathers and the 
fathers of all the Quiché nation took their [battle] positions. They were on each one of the 
mountains, and they were like guards--of the mountains; they were guarding [with] their bows 
and slings; they were the sentinels of the war. They were not of different origin, nor did they 
have a different god, when they went. They went only to fortify their towns. 
Then all the people of Uvilá went out, those of Chulimal, Zaquiyá, Xahbaquieh, Chi-Temah, 
Vahxalahuh, and the people of Cabracán, Chabicac-Chi-Hunahpú, and those of Macá, those 
of Xoyabah and those of Zaccabahá, those of Ziyahá, those of Miquiná, those of Xelahuh, and 
those of the coast. They went to observe the war and to guard the land, when they went by 
order of Quicab and Cavizimah, [who were] the Ahpop and the Ahpop-Camhá, and the Galel 
and the Ahtzic-Vinac, who were the four lords. 
They were sent in order to watch the enemies of Quicab and Cavizimah, names of the kings, 
both of the House of Cavec, of Queemá, name of the lord of the people of Nihaib, and of 
Achac-Iboy, the name of the lord of the people of Ahau-Quiché. These were the names of the 
lords who sent them, When their sons and vassals went to the mountains, to each one of the 
mountains. 
They went at once and they took captives; they brought their prisoners into the presence of 
Quicab, Cavizimah, the Galel, and the Ahtzic-Vinac. The bowmen and slingers made war, 
taking captives and prisoners. Some of the defenders of he positions were heroes, and the 
lords gave [them gifts] and lavished rewards upon them, when they came to deliver up all 
their captives and prisoners. 
Later they gathered in council by order of the lords, the Ahpop, the Ahpop-Camhá, the Galel, 
and the Ahtzic-Vinac, and they decided and said, that those who were there first should have 
the rank of representing their families. "I am the Ahpop! I am the Ahpop-Camhá! Mine shall 
be the rank of the Ahpop; meanwhile thou, the Ahau-Galel, shall have the rank of Galel," said 
all the lords when they held council.  
Those of Tamub and of Ilocab did likewise; equal in position were the three clans of the 
Quiché when for the first time they named their sons and vassals captains, and ennobled them. 
This was the result of the council. But they were not made captains here in Quiché. The 
mountain where the sons and vassals were made captains for the first time has its name, when 
all were sent, each one to his mountain, and all were reunited. Xebalax and Xecamax are the 
names of the mountains where they were made captains and they received their commands. 
This happened in Chulimal. 
In this manner was the naming, the promotion, and distinction of the twenty Galel, of the 
twenty Ahpop, who were named by the Ahpop and the Ahpop-Camhá and by the Galel and 
the Ahtzic-Vinac. All of the Galel-Ahpops received their rank: eleven Nim-Chocoh, Galel-
Ahau, Galel-Zaquic, Galel-Achih, Rahpop-Achih, Rahtzalam-Achih, Utzam-Achih were the 
names which the warriors received when their titles and distinctions were conferred upon 
them, as they were on their thrones and on their seats, being the first sons and vassals of the 
Quiché nation, their spies, their scouts, the bowmen, the slingers, the walls, doors, forts, and 
bastions of the Quiché. 
Those of Tamub and Ilocab also did thus; they named and ennobled the first sons and vassals 
who were in each place. 
This, then, was the origin of the Galel-Ahpops, and of the titles which are now preserved in 
each one of these places. This is the way their titles were created, by the Ahpop and the 
Ahpop-Camhá, by the Galel and the Ahtzic-Vinac they were created.
