III. Chapter 7 
They came at last to the top of a mountain and there all the Quiché people and the tribes were 
reunited. There they all held council to make their plans. Today this mountain is called Chi-
Pixab, this is the name of the mountain. 
There they reunited and there they extolled themselves: "I am, I, the people of the Quiché! 
And thou, Tamub, that shall be thy name." And to those from Ilocab they said: "Thou, Ilocab, 
this shall be thy name. And these three Quiché [peoples] shall not disappear, our fate is the 
same," they said when they gave them their names. 
Then they gave the Cakchiquel their name: Gagchequeleb was their name. In the same way 
they named those of Rabinal, which was their name, and they still have it. And also those of 
Tziquinahá, as they are called today. Those are the names which they gave to each other. 
There they were come together to await the dawn and to watch for the coming of the star, 
which comes just before the sun, when it is about to rise. "We came from there, but we have 
separated," they said to each other. 
And their hearts were troubled; they were suffering greatly; they did not have food; they did 
not have sustenance; they only smelled the ends of their staffs and thus they imagined they 
were eating; but they did not eat when they came.  
It is not quite clear, however, how they crossed the sea; they crossed to this side, as if there 
were no sea; they crossed on stones, placed in a row over the sand. For this reason they were 
called Stones in a Row, Sand Under the Sea, names given to them when they [the tribes] 
crossed the sea, the waters having parted when they passed. 
And their hearts were troubled when they talked together, because they had nothing to eat, 
only a drink of water and a handful of corn they had.  
There they were, then, assembled on the mountain called Chi-Pixab. And they had also 
brought Tohil, Avilix, and Hacavitz. Balam-Quitzé and his wife Cahá-Paluna, which was the 
name of his wife, observed a complete fast. And so did Balam-Acab and his wife, who was 
called Chomihá; and Mahucutah and his wife, called Tzununihá, also observed a complete 
fast, and Iqui-Balam. with his wife, called Caquixahá, likewise. 
And there were those who fasted in the darkness, and in the night. Great was their sorrow 
when they were on the mountain, called Chi-Pixab.
