IV. Chapter 5 
And as they had had a presentiment of their death, they counseled their children. They were 
not ill, they had neither pain nor agony when they gave their advice to their children. 
These are the names of their sons: Balam-Quitzé had two sons, Qocaib the first was called, 
and Qocavib was the name of the second son of Balam-Quitzé, the grandfather and father of 
those of Cavec. 
And these are the two sons which Balam-Acab begot, here are their names: Qoacul the first of 
his sons was called, and Qoacutec was the name of the second son of Balam-Acab [the 
founder] of those of Nihaib.  
Mahucutah had but one son, who was called Qoahau. 
Those three had sons, but Iqui-Balam did not have children. They were really the sacrificers, 
and these are the names of their sons. 
So, then, they bade [their sons] farewell. The four were together and they began to sing, 
feeling sad in their hearts; and their hearts wept when they sang the camucú, as the song is 
called which they sang when they bade farewell to their sons. 
"Oh, our sons! we are going, we are going away; sane advice and wise counsel we leave you. 
And you, also, who came from our distant country, oh our wives! they said to their women, 
and they bade farewell to each one. "We are going back to our town, there already in his place 
is Our Lord of the stags, to be seen there in the sky. We are going to begin our return, we have 
completed our mission [here], our days are ended. Think, then, of us, do not erase us [from 
your memory], nor forget us. You shall see your homes and your mountains again; settle, 
there, and so let it be! Go on your way and you shall see again the place from which we 
came." 
These words they said when they bade them farewell. Then Balam-Quitzé left the symbol of 
his being: "This is a remembrance which I leave you. This shall be your power. I take my 
leave filled with sorrow," he added. Then he left the symbol of his being, the Pizom-Gagal, as 
it was called, whose form was invisible because it was wrapped up and could not be 
unwrapped; the seam did not show because it was not seen when they wrapped it up. 
In this way they took their leave and immediately they disappeared there on the summit of the 
mountain Hacavitz. 
They [the four lords] were not buried by their wives nor by their children, because they were 
not seen when they disappeared. Only their leaving was seen dearly, and therefore the bundle 
was very dear to them. it was the reminder of their fathers and at once they burned incense 
before this reminder of their fathers. 
And then the lords, who succeeded Balam-Quitzé, begot new generations of men, and this 
was the beginning of the grandfathers and fathers of those of Cavec; but their sons, those 
called Qocaib and Qocavib, did not disappear. 
In this way the four died, our first grandfathers and fathers; in this way they disappeared, 
leaving their children on the mountain Hacavitz, there where they have remained. 
And the people being subdued already, and their grandeur ended, the tribes no longer had 
power, and all lived to serve daily. 
They remembered their fathers; great was the glory of the bundle to them. Never did they 
unwrap it, but it was always wrapped, and with them. Bundle of Greatness they called it when 
they extolled and named that which their fathers had left in their care as a symbol of their 
being. 
In this manner, then, came about the disappearance and end of Balam-Quitzé, Balam-Acab, 
Mahucutah, and Iqui-Balam, the first men who came there from the other side of the sea, 
where the sun rises. They had been here a long time when they died, being very old, the chiefs 
and sacrificers, as they were called.
