IV. Chapter 11 
WE SHALL NOW TELL OF THE HOUSE of the God. The house was also given the same 
name as the god. The Great Edifice of Tohil was the name of the Temple of Tohil, of those of 
Cavec. Avilix was the name of the Temple of Avilix, of the people of Nihaib; and Hacavitz 
was the name of the Temple of the God of the people of Ahau-Quiché.  
Tzutuhá, which is seen in Cahbahá, is the name of a large edifice in which there was a stone 
which all the lords of Quiché worshiped and which was also worshiped by all the tribes.  
The people first offered their sacrifices before Tohil, and afterward went to pay their respects 
to the Ahpop and the Ahpop-Camhá. Then they went to Present their gorgeous feathers and 
their tribute before the king. And the kings whom they maintained were the Ahpop and the 
Ahpop-Camhá, who had conquered their towns. 
Great lords and wonderful men were the marvelous kings Gucumatz and Cotuhá, the 
marvelous kings Quicab and Cavizimah. They knew if there would be war, and everything 
was clear before their eyes; they saw if there would be death and hunger, if there would be 
strife. They well knew that there was a place where it could be seen, that there was a book 
which they called the Popol Vuh.  
But not only in this way was the estate of the lords great, great also were their fasts. And this 
was in recognition of their having been created, and in recognition of their having been given 
their kingdoms. They fasted a long time and made sacrifices to their gods. Here is how they 
fasted: Nine men fasted and another nine made sacrifices and burned incense. Thirteen more 
men fasted, and another thirteen more made offerings and burned incense before Tohil. And 
while before their god, they nourished themselves only with fruits, with zapotes, matasanos, 
and jocotes. And they did not eat any tortillas. Now if there were seventeen men who made 
sacrifice, or ten who fasted, the truth is they did not eat. They fulfilled their great precepts, 
and thus showed their position as lords. 
Neither had they women to sleep with, but they remained alone, fasting. They were in the 
House of God, all day they prayed, burning incense and making sacrifices. Thus they 
remained from dusk until dawn, grieving in their hearts and in their breasts, and begging for 
happiness and life for their sons and vassals as well as for their kingdom, and raising their 
faces to the sky. 
Here are their petitions to their god, when they prayed; and this was the supplication of their 
hearts: 
"Oh, Thou, beauty of the day! Thou, Huracán; Thou, Heart of Heaven and of Earth! Thou, 
giver of richness, and giver of the daughters and the sons! Turn toward us your power and 
your riches; grant life and growth unto my sons and vassals; let those who must maintain and 
nourish Thee multiply and increase; those who invoke Thee on the roads, in the fields, on the 
banks of the rivers, in the ravines, under the trees, under the vines. 
"Give them daughters and sons. Let them not meet disgrace, nor misfortune, let not the 
deceiver come behind or before them. Let them not fall, let them not be wounded, let them not 
fornicate, nor be condemned by justice. Let them not fall on the descent or on the ascent of 
the road. Let them not encounter obstacles back of them or before them, nor anything which 
strikes them. Grant them good roads, beautiful, level roads. Let them not have misfortune, nor 
disgrace, through Thy fault, through Thy sorceries. 
"Grant a good life to those who must give Thee sustenance and place food in Thy mouth, in 
Thy presence, to Thee, Heart of Heaven, Heart of Earth, Bundle of Majesty. And Thou, Tohil; 
Thou, Avilix; Thou, Hacavitz, Arch of the Sky, Surface of the Earth, the Four Corners, the 
Four Cardinal Points. Let there be but peace and tranquility in Thy mouth, in Thy presence, 
oh, God!"  
Thus [spoke] the lords, while within, the nine men fasted, the thirteen men, and the seventeen 
men. During the day they fasted and their hearts grieved for their sons and vassals and for all 
their wives and their children when each of the lords made his offering. 
This was the price of a happy life, the price of power, the price of the authority of the Ahpop, 
of the Ahpop-Camhá, of the Galel and of the Ahtzic-Vinac. Two by two they ruled, each pair 
succeeding the other in order to bear the burden of the people of all the Quiché nation. 
One only was the origin of their tradition and [one only] the origin of the manner of 
maintaining and sustaining, and one only, too, was the origin of the tradition and the customs 
of those of Tamub and Ilocab and the people of Rabinal and the Cakchiquel, those of 
Tziquinahá, of Tuhalahá and Uchabahá. And there was but one trunk [a single family] when 
they heard there in Quiché what all of them were to do. 
But it was not only thus that they reigned. They did not squander the gifts of those whom they 
sustained and nourished, but they ate and drank them. Neither did they buy them; they had 
won and seized their empire, their power, and their sovereignty. 
And it was not at small cost, that they conquered the fields and the towns; the small towns and 
the large towns paid high ransoms; they brought precious stones and metals, they brought 
honey of the bees, bracelets, bracelets of emeralds and other stones, and brought garlands 
made of blue feathers, the tribute of all the towns. They came into the presence of the 
marvelous kings Gucumatz and Cotuhá, and before Quicab and Cavizimah, the Ahpop, the 
Ahpop-Camhá, the Galel and the Ahtzic-Vinac.  
It was not little what they did, neither were few, the tribes which they conquered. Many 
branches of the tribes came to pay tribute to the Quiché; full of sorrow they came to give it 
over. Nevertheless, the [Quiché] power did not grow quickly. Gucumatz it was, who began 
the aggrandizement of the kingdom. Thus was the beginning of his aggrandizement and that 
of the Quiché nation. 
And now we shall name the generations of the lords and give their names; again we shall 
name all of the lords.
