PART III: Chapter 1 
Here, then is the beginning of when it was decided to make man, and when what must enter 
into the flesh of man was sought. 
And the Forefathers, the Creators and Makers, who were called Tepeu and Gucumatz said: 
"The time of dawn has come, let the work be finished, and let those who are to nourish and 
sustain us appear, the noble sons, the civilized vassals; let man appear, humanity, on the face 
of the earth." Thus they spoke. 
They assembled, came together and held council in the darkness and in the night; then they 
sought and discussed, and here they reflected and thought. In this way their decisions came 
dearly to light and they found and discovered what must enter into the flesh of man. 
It was just before the sun, the moon, and the stars appeared over the Creators and Makers. 
From Paxil, from Cayalá, as they were called, came the yellow ears of corn and the white ears 
of corn. 
These are the names of the animals which brought the food: yac (the mountain cat), utiú (the 
coyote), quel (a small parrot), and hoh (the crow). These four animals gave tidings of the 
yellow ears of corn and the white ears of corn, they told them that they should go to Paxil and 
they showed them the road to Paxil.   
And thus they found the food, and this was what went into the flesh of created man, the made 
man; this was his blood; of this the blood of man was made. So the corn entered [into the 
formation of man] by the work of the Forefathers. 
And in this way they were filled with joy, because they had found a beautiful land, full of 
pleasures, abundant in ears of yellow corn and ears of white corn, and abundant also in 
pataxte and cacao, and in innumerable zapotes, anonas, jocotes, nantzes, matasanos, and 
honey. There was an abundance of delicious food in those villages called Paxil and Cayalá. 
There were foods of every kind, small and large foods, small plants and large plants. 
The animals showed them the road. And then grinding the yellow corn and the white corn, 
Xmucané made nine drinks, and from this food came the strength and the flesh, and with it 
they created the muscles and the strength of man. This the Forefathers did, Tepeu and 
Gucumatz, as they were called. 
After that they began to talk about the creation and the making of our first mother and father; 
of yellow corn and of white corn they made their flesh; of corn-meal dough they made the 
arms and the legs of man. Only dough of corn meal went into the flesh of our first fathers, the 
four men, who were created.
