III. Chapter 9 
Here, then, is the dawn, and the coming of the sun, the moon, and the stars. 
Balam-Quitzé, Balam-Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui-Balam were very happy when they saw the 
Morning Star. It rose first, with shining face, when it came ahead of the sun. 
Immediately they unwrapped the incense which they had brought from the East, and which 
they had planned to burn, and then they untied the three gifts which they had planned to offer. 
The incense which Balam-Quitzé brought was called Mixtán-Pom; the incense which Balam-
Acab brought was called Cavixtán-Pom; and that which Mahucutah brought was called 
Cabauil-Pom. The three had their incense and burned it when they began to dance facing 
toward the East. 
They wept for joy as they danced and burned their incense, their precious incense. Then they 
wept because they did not yet behold nor see the sunrise. 
But, then, the sun came up. The small and large animals were happy; and arose from the 
banks of the river, in the ravines, and on the tops of the mountains, and all turned their eyes to 
where the sun was rising. 
Then the puma and the jaguar roared. But first the bird called Queletzú burst into song. In 
truth, all the animals were happy, and the eagle, the white vulture; the small birds and the 
large birds stretched their wings. 
The Priests and the sacrificers were kneeling; great was the joy of the priests and sacrificers 
and of the people of Tamub and Ilocab and the people of Rabinal, the Cakchiquel, those from 
Tziquinahá, and those from Tuhalhá, Uchabahá, Quibahá, from Batená, and the Yaqui Tepeu, 
all those tribes which exist today. And it was not possible to count the people. The light of 
dawn fell upon all the tribes at the same time. 
Instantly the surface of the earth was dried by the sun. Like a man was the sun when it 
showed itself, and its face glowed when it dried the surface of the earth. 
Before the sun rose, damp and muddy was the surface of the earth, before the sun came up; 
but then the sun rose, and came up like a man. And its heat was unbearable. It showed itself 
when it was born and remained fixed [in the sky] like a mirror. Certainly it was not the same 
sun which we see, it is said in their old tales. 
Immediately afterward Tohil, Avilix, and Hacavitz were turned to stone, together with the 
deified beings the puma, the jaguar, the snake, the cantil, and the hobgoblin. Their arms 
became fastened to the trees when the sun, the moon, and the stars appeared. All alike, were 
changed into stone. Perhaps we should not be living today because of the voracious animals, 
the puma, the jaguar, the snake, and the cantil, as well as the hobgoblin; perhaps our power 
would not exist if these first animals had not been turned into stone by the sun. 
When the sun arose, the hearts of Balam-Quitzé, Balam-Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui-Balam 
were filled with joy. Great was their joy when it dawned. And there were not many men at 
that place; only a few were there on the mountain Hacavitz. There dawn came to them, there 
they burned their incense and danced, turning their gaze toward the East, whence they had 
come. There were their mountains and their valleys, whence had come Balam-Quitzé, Balam-
Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui-Balam, as they were called. 
But it was here where they multiplied, on the mountain, and this was their town; here they 
were, too, when the sun, the moon, and the stars appeared, when it dawned and the face of the 
earth and the whole world was lighted. Here, too, began their song, which they call camucú; 
they sang it, but only the pain in their hearts and their innermost selves they expressed in their 
song. "Oh pity us! In Tulán we were lost, we were separated, and there our older and younger 
brothers stayed. Ah, we have seen the sun! but where are they now, that it has dawned?" so 
said the priests and the sacrificers of the Yaqui. 
Because, in truth, the so-called Tohil is the same god of the Yaqui, the one called Yolcuat-
Quitzalcuat.  
"We became separated there in Tulán, in Zuyva, from there we went out together, and there 
our race was created when we came," they said to each other. 
Then they remembered their older brothers and their younger brothers, the Yaqui, to whom 
dawn came there in the land which today is called Mexico. Part of the people remained there 
in the East, those called Tepeu Olimán, who stayed there, they say. 
They felt much grief in their hearts, there in Hacavitz; and sad, too, were the people from 
Tamub and Ilocab, who were also there in the forest called Amac-Tan. Where dawn came to 
the priests and sacrificers of Tamub and to their god, who also was Tohil, because one and the 
same was the name of the god of the three branches of the Quiché people. And this is also the 
name of the god of the people of Rabinal, for there is little difference between that and the 
name of Huntoh, as the god of the people of Rabinal is called; for that reason, it is said, they 
wanted to make their speech the same as that of the Quiché. 
Well, the speech of the Cakchiquel is different, because the name of their god was different 
when they came from there, from Tulán-Zuyva. Tzotzihá Chimalcan was the name of their 
god, and today they speak a different tongue; and also from their god the families of 
Ahpozotzil and Ahpoxa, as they are called, took their names. 
The speech of the god was also changed when they were given their god there, in Tulán, near 
the stone; their speech was changed when they came from Tulán in the darkness. And being 
together, dawn came to them and the light shone on all the tribes, in the order of the names of 
the gods of each of the tribes.
