I. Chapter 3 
Immediately the wooden figures were annihilated, destroyed, broken up, and killed. 
A flood was brought about by the Heart of Heaven; a great flood was formed which fell on 
the heads of the wooden creatures. 
Of tzité the flesh of man was made, but when woman was fashioned by the Creator and the 
Maker, her flesh was made of rushes. These were the materials the Creator and the Maker 
wanted to use in making them. 
But those that they had made, that they had created, did not think, did not speak with their 
Creator, their Maker. And for this reason they were killed, they were deluged. A heavy resin 
fell from the sky. The one called Xecotcovach came and gouged out their eyes; Camalotz 
came and cut off their heads; Cotzbalam came and devoured their flesh. Tucumbalam came, 
too, and broke and mangled their bones and their nerves, and ground and crumbled their 
bones.  
This was to punish them because they had not thought of their mother, nor their father, the 
Heart of Heaven, called Huracán. And for this reason the face of the earth was darkened and a 
black rain began to fall, by day and by night. 
Then came the small animals and the large animals, and sticks and stones struck their faces. 
And all began to speak: their earthen jars, their griddles, their plates, their pots, their grinding 
stones, all rose up and struck their faces. 
"You have done us much harm; you ate us, and now we shall kill you," said their dogs and 
birds of the barnyard.   
And the grinding stones said: "We were tormented by you; every day, every day, at night, at 
dawn, all the time our faces went holi, holi, huqui, huqui, because of you. This was the tribute 
we paid you. But now that you are no longer men, you shall feel our strength. We shall grind 
and tear your flesh to pieces," said their grinding stones. 
And then their dogs spoke and said: "Why did you give us nothing to eat? You scarcely 
looked at us, but you chased us and threw us out. You always had a stick ready to strike us 
while you were eating. 
"Thus it was that you treated us. You did not speak to us. Perhaps we shall not kill you now; 
but why did you not look ahead, why did you not think about yourselves? Now we shall 
destroy you, now you shall feel the teeth of our mouths; we shall devour you," said the dogs, 
and then, they destroyed their faces.   
And at the same time, their griddles and pots spoke: "Pain and suffering you have caused us. 
Our mouths and our faces were blackened with soot; we were always put on the fire and you 
burned us as though we felt no pain. Now you shall feel it, we shall burn you," said their pots, 
and they all destroyed their [the wooden men's] faces. The stones of the hearth, which were 
heaped together, hurled themselves straight from the fire against their heads causing them 
pain.   
The desperate ones [the men of wood] ran as quickly as they could; they wanted to climb to 
the tops of the houses. 
And the houses fell down and threw them to the ground; they wanted to climb to the treetops, 
and the trees cast them far away; they wanted to enter the caverns, and the caverns repelled 
them.   
So was the ruin of the men who had been created and formed, the men made to be destroyed 
and annihilated; the mouths and faces of all of them were mangled. 
And it is said that their descendants are the monkeys which now live in the forests; these are 
all that remain of them because their flesh was made only of wood by the Creator and the 
Maker. 
And therefore the monkey looks like man, and is an example of a generation of men which 
were created and made but were only wooden figures.
