III. Chapter 4 
Balam-Quitzé, Balam-Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui-Balam said, "Let us await the break of 
day." So said those great wise men, the enlightened men, the priests and sacrificers. This they 
said. 
Our first mothers and fathers did not yet have wood nor stones to keep; but their hearts were 
tired of waiting for the sun. Already all the tribes and the Yaqui people, the priests and 
sacrificers, were very many. 
"Let us go, let us go to search and see if our [tribal] symbols are in safety; if we can find what 
we must burn before them. For being as we are, there is no one who watches for us," said 
Balam-Quitzé, Balam-Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui-Balam. 
And having heard of a city, they went there. 
Now then, the name of the place where Balam-Quitzé, Balam-Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui-
Balam and those of Tamub and Ilocab went was Tulán-Zuivá, Vucub-Pec, Vucub-Ziván. This 
was the name of the city where they went to receive their gods. 
So, then, all arrived at Tulán. It was impossible to count the men who arrived; there were very 
many and they walked in an orderly way. 
Then was the appearance of their gods; first those of Balam-Quitzé, Balam-Acab, Mahucutah, 
and Iqui-Balam who were filled with joy: "At last we have found that for which we 
searched!" they said. 
And the first that appeared was Tohil, as this god was called, and Balam-Quitzé put him on 
his back, in his chest. Instantly the god called Avilix appeared, and Balam-Acab carried him. 
The god called Hacavitz was carried by Mahucutah; and Iqui-Balam carried the one called 
Nicahtacah.   
And together with the people of the Quiché, they also received those of Tamub. And in the 
same way Tohil was the name of the god of the Tamub who received the grandfather and 
father of the Lords of Tamub, whom we know today. 
In the third place were those of Ilocab. Tohil was also the name of the god who was received 
by the grandfathers and the fathers of the lords, whom we also know today. 
In this way, the three Quiché [families] were given their names and they did not separate, 
because they had a god of the same name, Tohil of the Quiché, Tohil of the Tamub and 
[Tohil] of the Ilocab; one only was the name of the god, and therefore the three Quiché 
[families] did not separate. 
Great indeed was the virtue of the three, Tohil, Avilix, and Hacavitz. 
Then all the people arrived, those from Rabinal, the Cakchiquel, those from Tziquinahá, and 
the people who now are called the Yaqui. And there it was that the speech of the tribes 
changed; their tongues became different. They could no longer understand each other clearly 
after arriving at Tulán. There also they separated, there were some who had to go to the East, 
but many came here. 
And their clothing was only the skins of animals; they had no good clothes to put on, the skins 
of animals were their only dress. They were poor, they possessed nothing, but they had the 
nature of extraordinary men. 
When they arrived at Tulán-Zuivá, Vucub-Pec, Vucub-Zivan, the old traditions say that they 
had traveled far in order to arrive there.
