III. Chapter 6 
There was nevertheless a tribe who stole the fire in the smoke; and they were from the house 
of Zotzil. The god of the Cakchiquel was called Chamalcán and he had the form of a bat. 
When they passed through the smoke, they went softly and then they seized the fire. The 
Cakchiquel did not ask for the fire, because they did not want to give themselves up to be 
overcome, the way that the other tribes had been overcome when they offered their breasts 
and their armpits so that they would be opened. And this was the opening [of the breasts] 
about which Tohil had spoken; that they should sacrifice all the tribes before him, that they 
should tear out their hearts from their breasts. 
And this had not yet begun when the taking of power and sovereignty by Balam-Quitzé, 
Balam.-Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui-Balam was prophesied by Tohil.  
There in Tulán-Zuivá, whence they had come, they were accustomed to fast, they observed a 
perpetual fast while they awaited the coming of dawn and watched for the rising sun. 
They took turns at watching the Great Star called Icoquih, which rises first before the sun, 
when the sun rises, the brilliant Icoquih, which was always before them in the East, when they 
were there in the place called Tulán-Zuivá, whence came their god. 
It was not here, then, where they received their power and sovereignty, but there they subdued 
and subjected the large and small tribes when they sacrificed them before Tohil, and offered 
him the blood, the substance, breasts, and sides of all the men. 
In Tulán power came instantly to them; great was their wisdom in the darkness and in the 
night. 
Then they came, they pulled up stakes there and left the East. "This is not our home; let us go 
and see where we should settle," Tohil said then. 
In truth, he was accustomed to talk to Balam-Quitzé, Balam-Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui-
Balam: "Give thanks before setting out; do what is necessary to bleed your ears, prick your 
elbows, and make your sacrifices, this shall be your thanks to God." 
"Very well, "they said, and took blood from their ears. And they wept in their chants because 
of their departure from Tulán; their hearts mourned when they left Tulán. 
"Pity us! We shall not see the dawn here, when the sun rises and lights the face of the earth," 
they said at leaving. But they left some people on the road which they followed so that they 
would keep watch. 
Each of the tribes kept getting up to see the star which was the herald of the sun. This sign of 
the dawn they carried in their hearts when they came from the East, and with the same hope 
they left there, from that great distance, according to what their songs now say.
