IV. Chapter 3 
Afterwards the tribes held council again. 
"What shall we do with them? in truth, their estate is very great," they said when they 
assembled again in council. 
"Well, then, we shall waylay them, we shall kill them, we shall arm ourselves with bows and 
with shields. Perchance, are we not many? Let there not be one or two among us who remains 
behind." This they said when they held council. And all the people armed. Many were the 
warriors when all the people gathered together for the killing. 
Meanwhile, there were Balam-Quitzé, Balam-Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui-Balam, they were 
on the mountain Hacavitz, on the hill of this name. They were there in order to save their sons 
who were on the mountain. 
And they did not have many people, they did not have multitudes such as the multitudes of 
the tribes. The summit of the mountain where they had their place was small, and for that 
reason when the tribes assembled together and rose, they decided to kill all of them. 
In this manner, then, took place the reunion of all the people, all armed with their bows and 
their shields. It is impossible to describe the richness of their arms; the appearance of all the 
chiefs and men was very beautiful, and certainly all obeyed their orders. 
"They shall positively be destroyed, and as for Tohil. he shall be our god, we shall worship 
him, if we take him prisoner," they said to each other. But Tohil knew everything and so did 
Balam-Quitzé, Balam-Acab, and Mahucutah. They heard all the plans, because they did not 
sleep, or rest, from the time the warriors armed themselves. 
Then all the warriors rose up and started out on the road, intending to enter [the town] by 
night. But they did not arrive, for all the warriors were watching on the road, and then they 
were destroyed by Balam-Quitzé, Balam-Acab, and Mahucutah. 
All remained watching along the road, but they heard nothing and they finally fell asleep. 
Then they [Balam-Quitzé, Balam-Acab, and Mahucutah] began to pull out their eyelashes and 
their beards; they took off the metal ornaments from their throats--their crowns and necklaces. 
And they took the metal from the handles of their spears. They did this to punish them and 
humiliate them, and give them an example of the power of the Quiché people. 
When they [the warriors] awoke, they wanted to take their crowns and their staffs, but they no 
longer had metal in the staff-handles, nor their crowns. "Who has stripped us? Who has torn 
out our beards? Whence have they come to rob us of our precious metals?" said all of the 
warriors. "Can it be these devils who are carrying off the men? But they shall not succeed in 
frightening us. We shall enter their town by force, and we shall again see the face of our 
silver; this we shall do," said all the tribes, and all truly intended to carry out their word. 
Meanwhile the hearts of the priests and the sacrificers on the summit of the mountain were 
calm. And Balam-Quitzé, Balam-Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui-Balam having talked together, 
they built a wall at the edge of the town and enclosed it with boards and thorns. Then they 
made figures in the form of men, and put them in rows on the wall, armed them with shields 
and arrows and adorned them, putting metal crowns on their heads. These they put on the 
simple wooden figures, they adorned them with the metal which they had taken from the 
tribes on the road and with them they decorated the figures. 
They made a moat around the town, and then they asked advice of Tohil: "Shall they kill us? 
Shall they overcome us?" their hearts said to Tohil. 
"Do not be troubled! I am here. And this you will use. Do not be afraid," he [Tohil] said to 
Balam-Quitzé, Balam-Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui-Balam, when they were given the 
bumblebees and the wasps. This is what they went to fetch. And when they came, they put 
them inside four big gourds which were placed around the town. They shut the bumblebees 
and wasps inside the gourds, in order to fight the people with them. 
The city was watched from afar, spied upon and observed by the scouts of the tribes. "They 
are not many," they said. But they saw only the wooden figures which lightly moved their 
bows and their shields. In truth, they had the appearance of men, had in truth the appearance 
of warriors when the tribes looked at them, and all the tribes were happy because they saw 
that they were not many. 
There were many tribes; it was not possible to count the people, the warriors and soldiers who 
were going to kill Balam-Quitzé, Balam-Acab, and Mahucutah, who were on the mountain 
Hacavitz, the name of the place where they were found. 
Now we shall tell about their arrival.
