II. Chapter 11 
Immediately he [Xbalanqué] called all the animals, the coati, the wild boar, all the animals 
small and large, during the night, and at dawn he asked them what their food was. 
"What does each of you eat? For I have called you so that you may choose your food," said 
Xbalanqué to them. 
"Very well," they answered. And immediately each went to take his [own food] and they all 
went together. Some went to take rotten things; others went to take grasses; others went to get 
stones. Others went to gather earth. Varied was the food of the [small] animals and of the 
large animals. 
Behind them the turtle was lingering, it came waddling along to take its food. And reaching at 
the end [of Hunahpú's body] it assumed the form of the head of Hunahpú, and instantly the 
eyes were fashioned. 
Many soothsayers came, then, from heaven. The Heart of Heaven, Huracán, came to soar over 
the House of Bats. 
It was not easy to finish making the face, but it turned out very well; the hair had a handsome 
appearance and [the head] could also speak. 
But as it was about to dawn and the horizon reddened: "Make it dark again, old one!" the 
buzzard was told.   
"Very well, said the old one, and instantly the old one darkened [the sky]. "Now the buzzard 
has darkened it," the people say nowadays. 
And so, during the cool of dawn, the [Hunahpú] began his existence. 
"Will it be good?" they said. "Will it turn out to look like Hunahpú?" 
"It is very good," they answered. And really it seemed that the skull had changed itself back 
into a real head. 
Then they [the two boys] talked among themselves and agreed: "Do not play ball; only 
pretend to play; I shall do everything alone," said Xbalanqué.   
At once he gave his orders to a rabbit: "Go and take your place over the ball-court; stay there 
within the oak grove," the rabbit was told by Xbalanqué; "when the ball comes to you, run out 
immediately, and I shall do the rest," the rabbit was told, when they gave him these 
instructions during the night. 
Presently day broke and the two boys were well and healthy. Then they went down to play 
ball. The head of Hunahpú was suspended over the ball-court. 
"We have triumphed! [said the Lords of Xibalba].You worked your own destruction, you 
have delivered yourselves," they said. In this way they annoyed Hunahpú. 
"Hit his head with the ball," they said. But they did not bother him with it; he paid no 
attention to it.   
Then the Lords of Xibalba threw out the ball. Xbalanqué went out to get it; the ball was going 
straight to the ring, but it stopped, bounced, and passed quickly over the ball-court and with a 
jump went toward the oak grove. 
Instantly the rabbit ran out and went hopping; and the Lords of Xibalba ran after it. They 
went, making noise and shouting after the rabbit. It ended by all of the Lords of Xibalba 
going. 
At once Xbalanqué took possession of the head of Hunahpú; and taking the turtle he went to 
suspend it over the ball-court. And that head was actually the head of Hunahpú and the two 
boys were very happy. 
Those of Xibalba ran, then, to find the ball and having found it between the oaks, called them, 
saying: 
"Come here. Here is the ball. We found it," they said, and they brought it. 
When the Lords of Xibalba returned, they exclaimed, "What is this we see?" 
Then they began to play again. Both of them tied. 
Presently Xbalanqué threw a stone at the turtle, which came to the ground and fell in the ball-
court, breaking into a thousand pieces like seeds, before the lords. 
"Who of you shall go to find it? Where is the one who shall go to bring it?" said the Lords of 
Xibalba. 
And so were the Lords of Xibalba overcome by Hunahpú and Xbalanqué. These two suffered 
great hardships, but they did not die despite all that was done to them.
