II. Chapter 5 
Now we shall tell of the birth of Hunahpú and Xbalanqué. Here, then, we shall tell about their 
birth. 
When the day of their birth arrived, the girl named Xquic gave birth; but the grandmother did 
not see them when they were born. Instantly the two boys called Hunahpú and Xbalanqué 
were born. There in the wood they were born. 
Then they came to the house, but they could not sleep. 
"Go throw them out! "said the old woman, "because truly they cry very much." Then they 
went and put them on an ant-hill. There they slept peacefully. Then they took them from the 
ant-hill and laid them on thistles. 
Now, what Hunbatz and Hunchouén wished was that they [Hunahpú and Xbalanqué] would 
die there on the ant-hill, or on the thistles. They wished this because of the hatred and envy 
Hunbatz and Hunchouén felt for them. 
At first they refused to receive their younger brothers in the house; they would not recognize 
them and so they were brought up in the fields. 
Hunbatz and Hunchouén were great musicians and singers; they had grown up in the midst of 
trials and want and they had had much trouble, but they became very wise. They were 
flautists, singers, painters, and carvers; all of this they knew how to do. 
They had heard about their birth and knew also that they were the successors of their parents, 
those who went to Xibalba and died there. Hunbatz and Hunchouén were diviners, and in their 
hearts they knew everything concerning the birth of their two younger brothers. Nevertheless, 
because they were envious, they did not show their wisdom, and their hearts were filled with 
bad will for them, although Hunahpú and Xbalanqué had not offended them in any way. 
These two [last] did nothing all day long but shoot their blowguns; they were not loved by 
their grandmother, nor by Hunbatz, nor by Hunchouén; they were given nothing to eat; only 
when the meal was ended and Hunbatz and Hunchouén had already eaten, then the younger 
brothers came to eat. But they did not become angry, nor did they become vexed, but suffered 
silently, because they knew their rank, and they understood everything clearly. They brought 
their birds when they came, and Hunbatz and Hunchouén ate them without giving anything to 
either of the two, Hunahpú and Xbalanqué. 
The only thing that Hunbatz and Hunchouén did was to play the flute and sing. 
And once when Hunahpú and Xbalanqué came without bringing any bird at all, they went into 
the house and their grandmother became furious. 
"Why did you bring no birds?" she said to Hunahpú and Xbalanqué. 
And they answered: "What happened, grandmother, is that our birds were caught in the tree 
and we could not climb up to get them, dear grandmother. If our elder brothers so wish, let 
them come with us to bring the birds down," they said. 
"Very well," the older brothers answered, "we shall go with you at dawn." 
The two younger brothers then discussed the way to overcome Hunbatz and Hunchouén. "We 
shall only change their nature, their appearance; and so let our word be fulfilled, for all the 
suffering that they have caused us. They wanted us to die, that we might be lost, we, their 
younger brothers. In their hearts they really believe that we have come to be their servants. 
For these reasons we shall overcome them and teach them a lesson." Thus they spoke. 
Then they went toward the foot of the tree called Canté. They were accompanied by their two 
elder brothers and they were shooting their blowguns. It was not possible to count the birds 
which sang in the tree, and their elder brothers marveled to see so many birds. There were 
birds, but not one fell at the foot of the tree. 
"Our birds do not fall to the ground. Go and fetch them down," they said to their elder 
brothers. 
"Very well," the latter answered. And then they climbed the tree; but the tree became larger 
and the trunk swelled. Then Hunbatz and Hunchouén wanted to come down but they could 
not come down from the top of the tree. 
Then they called from the treetop. "What has happened to us, our brothers? Unfortunate we. 
This tree frightens us only to look at it. Oh, our brothers!" they called from the treetop. And 
Hunahpú and Xbalanqué answered: "Loosen your breechclouts; tie them below your stomach, 
leaving the long ends hanging and pull these from behind, and in this way you can walk 
easily." Thus said the younger brothers. 
"Very well," they answered, pulling the ends of their belts back, but instantly these were 
changed into tails and they took on the appearance of monkeys. Then they hopped over the 
branches of the trees, among the great woods and little woods, and they buried themselves in 
the forest, making faces and swinging in the branches of the trees. 
In this way Hunbatz and Hunchouén were overcome by Hunahpú and Xbalanqué; and only 
because of their magic could they have done it. 
Then they returned to their home, and when they arrived they spoke to their grandmother and 
their mother, and said to them: "What could it be, grandmother, that has happened to our elder 
brothers, that suddenly their faces turned into the faces of animals?" So they said. 
"If you have done any harm to your elder brothers, you have hurt me and have filled me with 
sadness. Do not do such a thing to your brothers, oh, my children," said the old woman to 
Hunahpú and Xbalanqué. 
And they replied to their grandmother: 
"Do not grieve, our grandmother. You shall see our brother's faces again; they shall return, but 
it will be a difficult trial for you, grandmother. Be careful that you do not laugh at them. And 
now, let us cast our lot," they said. 
Immediately they began to play their flutes, playing the song of Hunahpú-Qoy. Then they 
sang, playing the flute and drum, picking up their flutes and their drum. Afterward they sat 
down close to their grandmother and continued playing and calling back [their brothers] with 
music and song, intoning the song, called Hunahpú-Qoy. 
At last, Hunbatz and Hunchouén came and began to dance; but when the old woman saw their 
ugly faces, she began to laugh, unable to control her laughter, and they went away at once and 
she did not see their faces again. 
"Now you see, grandmother! They have gone to the forest. What have you done, grandmother 
of ours? We may make this trial but four times and only three are left. Let us call them [back 
again] with flute and with song, but you, try to control your laughter. Let the trial begin!" said 
Hunahpú and Xbalanqué. 
Immediately they began again to play. Hunbatz and Hunchouén returned dancing, and came 
as far as the center of the court of the house grimacing and provoking their grandmother to 
laughter, until finally she broke into loud laughter. They were really very amusing with their 
monkey faces, their broad bottoms, their narrow tails, and the hole of their stomach. all of 
which made the old woman laugh. 
Again the [elder brothers] went back to the woods. And Hunahpú and Xbalanqué said: "And 
now what shall we do, grandmother? We shall try once again, this third time." 
They played the flute again, and the monkeys returned dancing. The grandmother contained 
her laughter. Then they went up over the kitchen; their eyes gave off a red light; they drew 
away and scrubbed their noses and frightened each other with the faces they made. 
And as the grandmother saw all of this, she burst into violent laughter; and they did not see 
the faces [of the elder brothers] again because of the old woman's laughter. 
"Only once more shall we call them, grandmother, so that they shall come for the fourth 
time," said the boys. They began again, then, to play the flute, but [their brothers] did not 
return the fourth time, instead they fled into the forest as quickly as they could. 
The boys said to their grandmother: "We have done everything possible, dear grandmother; 
they came once, then we tried to call them again. But do not grieve, here we are, your 
grandchildren; you must look to us, oh, our mother! Oh, our grandmother! to remind you of 
our elder brothers, those who were called and have the names of Hunbatz and Hunchouén," 
said Hunahpú and Xbalanqué. 
They were invoked by the musicians and singers, and by the old people. The painters and 
craftsmen also invoked them in days gone by. But they were changed into animals and 
became monkeys because they became arrogant and abused their brothers. 
In this way they were disgraced; this was their loss, in this way Hunbatz and Hunchouén were 
overcome and became animals. They had always lived in their home; they were musicians and 
singers and also did great things when they lived with their grandmother and with their 
mother.
