PART II: Chapter 1 
Now we shall also tell the name of the father of Hunahpú and Xbalanqué. We shall not tell his 
origin and we shall not tell the history of the birth of Hunahpú and Xbalanqué. We shall tell 
only half of it, only a part of the history of his father. 
Here is the story. Here are the names of Hun-Hunahpú [and Vucub-Hunahpú], as they are 
called. Their parents were Xpiyacoc and Xmucané. During the night Hun-Hunahpú and 
Vucub-Hunahpú were born of Xpiyacoc and Xmucané.   
Well now, Hun-Hunahpú had begotten two sons; the first was called Hunbatz and the second 
Hunchouén.   
The mother of the two sons was called Xbaquiyalo. Thus was the wife of Hun-Hunahpú 
called. As for the other son, Vucub-Hunahpú, he had no wife; he was single. 
By nature these two sons were very wise, and great was their wisdom; on earth they were 
soothsayers of good disposition and good habits. All the arts were taught to Hunbatz and 
Hunchouén, the sons of Hun-Hunahpú. They were flautists, singers, shooters with blowguns, 
painters, sculptors, jewelers, silversmiths; these were Hunbatz and Hunchouén.   
Well, Hun-Hunahpú and Vucub-Hunahpú did nothing but play dice and ball A day long; and 
when the four got together to play ball, one pair played against the other pair. 
And Voc, the messenger of Huracán, of Chipi-Caculhá, of Raxa-Caculhá came there to watch 
them, but Voc did not stay far from the earth nor far from Xibalba, 7 and in an instant he went 
up to heaven to the side of Huracán. 
They were still here on earth when the mother of Hunbatz and Hunchouén died. 
And having gone to play ball on the road to Xibalba, they were overheard by Hun-Camé and 
Vucub-Camé, the lords of Xibalba.   
"What are they doing on earth? Who are they who are making the earth shake, and making so 
much noise? Go and call them! Let them come here to play ball. Here we will overpower 
them! We are no longer respected by them. They no longer have consideration, or fear of our 
rank, and they even fight above our heads," said all the lords of Xibalba. 
All of them held a council. Those called Hun-Camé and Vucub-Camé were the supreme 
judges. All the lords had been assigned their duties. Each one was given his own authority by 
Hun-Camé and Vucub-Camé. 
They were, then, Xiquiripat and Cuchumaquic lords of these names. They were the two who 
caused the shedding of blood of the men. 
Others were called Ahalpuh and Ahalganá, also lords. And their work was to make men swell 
and make pus gush forth from their legs and stain their faces yellow, what is called Chuganal. 
Such was the work of Ahalpuh and Ahalganá. 
Others were Lord Chamiabac and Lord Chamiaholom, constables of Xibalba whose staffs 
were of bone. Their work was to make men waste away until they were nothing but skin and 
bone and they died, and they carried them With their stomach and bones stretched out. This 
was the work of Chamiabac and Chamiaholom, as they were called. 
Others were called Lord Ahalmez and Lord Ahaltocob; their work was to bring disaster upon 
men, as they were going home, or in front of it, and they would be found wounded, stretched 
out, face up, on the ground, dead. This was the work of Ahalmez and Ahaltocob, as they were 
called. 
Immediately after them were other lords named Xic and Patán whose work it was to cause 
men to die on the road, which is called sudden death, making blood to rush to their mouths 
until they died vomiting blood. The work of each one of these lords was to seize upon them, 
squeeze their throats and chests, so that the men died on the road, making the blood rush to 
their throats when they were walking. This was the work of Xic and Patán. 
And having gathered in council, they discussed how to torment and wound Hun-Hunahpú and 
Vucub-Hunahpú. What the Lords of Xibalba coveted were the playing implements of Hun-
Hunahpú and Vucub-Hunahpú-their leather pads and rings and gloves and crown and masks 
which were the playing gear of Hun-Hunahpú and Vucub-Hunahpú. 
Now we shall tell of their journey to Xibalba and how they left behind them the sons of Hun-
Hunahpú, Hunbatz, and [Hun] Chouén, whose mother had died. 
Then we shall tell how Hunbatz and Hunchouén were overcome by Hunahpú and Xbalanqué.
