I. Chapter 8 
Now we shall tell how Zipacná was defeated by the two boys, Hunahpú and Xbalanqué. 
Now follows the defeat and death of Zipacná, when he was overcome by the two boys, 
Hunahpú and Xbalanqué. 
The boys' hearts were full of rancor because the four hundred young men had been killed by 
Zipacná. And he only hunted fish and crabs at the bank of the river, which were his daily 
food. During the day he went about looking for food, and at night he carried mountains on his 
back. 
With a leaf of the ec plant which is found in the forest, Hunahpú and Xbalanqué quickly made 
a figure to look like a very large crab. 
With this they made the stomach of the crab; the claws, they made of pahac, and for the shell, 
which covers the back, they used a stone. Then they put the crab at the bottom of a cave at the 
foot of a large mountain called Meaguán, where he was overcome. 
Then the boys went to find Zipacná on the river bank. 
"Where are you going, young man?" they asked him. 
"I am not going anywhere," Zipacná answered, "only looking for food, boys." 
"And what is your food?" 
"Fish and crabs, but there are none here and I have not found any; I have not eaten since day 
before yesterday, and I am dying of hunger," said Zipacná to Hunahpú and Xbalanqué. 
"Over there in the bottom of the ravine there is a crab, a really large crab, and it would be well 
if you would eat it! Only it bit us when we tried to catch it and so we were afraid. We 
wouldn't try to catch it for anything," said Hunahpú and Xbalanqué. 
"Have pity on me! Come and show it to me, boys," begged Zipacná. 
"We do not want to. You go alone, you will not get lost. Follow the bank of the river and you 
will come out at the foot of a large hill; there it is making a noise at the bottom of the ravine. 
You have only to go there," said Hunahpú and Xbalanqué. 
"Oh, unfortunate me! Won't you accompany me, boys? Come and show it to me. There are 
many birds which you can shoot with your blowguns and I know where to find them," said 
Zipacná. 
His meekness convinced the boys. And they asked him: But, can you really catch him? 
Because it is only for you that we are returning; we are not going to try to get it again because 
it bit us when we were crawling into the cave. After that we were afraid to crawl in, but we 
almost caught it. So, then, it is best that you crawl in," they said. 
"Very well," said Zipacná, and then they went with him. They arrived at the bottom of the 
ravine and there, stretched on his back, was the crab, showing his red shell. And there also in 
the bottom of the ravine was the boys' hoax.  
"Good! Good!" said Zipacná happily. "I should like to have it in my mouth already!" And he 
was really dying of hunger. He wanted to try to crawl in, he wanted to enter, but the crab was 
climbing. He came out at once and the boys asked, "Did you not get it?" 
"No," he answered," because he was going up and I almost caught him. But perhaps it would 
be good if I go in from above," he added. And then he entered again from above, but as he 
was almost inside, with only the soles of his feet showing, the great hill slid and fell slowly 
down on his chest. 
Zipacná never returned and he was changed into stone. 
In this way Zipacná was defeated by the two boys, Hunahpú and Xbalanqué; he was the elder 
son of Vucub-Caquix, and he, according to the ancient legend, was the one who made the 
mountains. 
At the foot of the hill called Meaguán he was vanquished. Only by a miracle was he 
vanquished, the second of the arrogant ones. One was left, whose history we shall tell now.
