I. Chapter 2 
Then they made the small wild animals, the guardians of the woods, the spirits of the 
mountains, the deer, the birds, pumas, jaguars, serpents, snakes. vipers, guardians of the 
thickets. 
And the Forefathers asked: 'Shall there be only silence and calm under the trees, under the 
vines? It is well that hereafter there be someone to guard them." 
So they said when they meditated and talked. Promptly the deer and the birds were created. 
immediately they gave homes to the deer and the birds. "You, deer, shall sleep in the fields by 
the river bank and in the ravines. Here you shall be amongst the thicket, amongst the pasture; 
in the woods you shall multiply, you shall walk on four feet and they will support you. Thus 
be it done!" So it was they spoke. 
Then they also assigned homes to the birds big and small. "You shall live in the trees and in 
the vines. There you shall make your nests; there you shall multiply; there you shall increase 
in the branches of the trees and in the vines." Thus the deer and the birds were told; they did 
their duty at once, and all sought their homes and their nests. 
And the creation of all the four-footed animals and the birds being finished, they were told by 
the Creator and the Maker and the Forefathers: "Speak, cry, warble, call, speak each one 
according to your variety, each, according to your kind." So was it said to the deer, the birds, 
pumas, jaguars, and serpents. 
"Speak, then, our names, praise us, your mother, your father. Invoke then, Huracán, Chipi-
Caculhá, Raxa-Caculhá, the Heart of Heaven, the Heart of Earth, the Creator, the Maker, the 
Forefathers; speak, invoke us, adore us," they were told. 
But they could not make them speak like men; they only hissed and screamed and cackled; 
they were unable to make words, and each screamed in a different way. 
When the Creator and the Maker saw that it was impossible for them to talk to each other, 
they said: "It is impossible for them to say our names, the names of us, their Creators and 
Makers. This is not well," said the Forefathers to each other. 
Then they said to them: "Because it has not been possible for you to talk, you shall be 
changed. We have changed our minds: Your food, your pasture, your homes. and your nests 
you shall have; they shall be the ravines and the woods, because it has not been possible for 
you to adore us or invoke us. There shall be those who adore us, we shall make other [beings] 
who shall be obedient. Accept your destiny: your flesh shall be tom to pieces. So shall it be. 
This shall be your lot." So they said, when they made known their will to the large and small 
animals which are on the face of the earth. 
They wished to give them another trial; they, wished to make another attempt; they wished to 
make [all living things] adore them. 
But they could not understand each other's speech; they could succeed in nothing, and could 
do nothing. For this reason they were sacrificed and the animals which were on earth were 
condemned to be killed and eaten. 
For this reason another attempt had to be made to create and make men by the Creator, the 
Maker, and the Forefathers. 
"Let us try again! Already dawn draws near: Let us make him who shall nourish and sustain 
us! What shall we do to be invoked, in order to be remembered on earth? We have already 
tried with our first creations, our first creatures; but we could not make them praise and 
venerate us. So, then, let us try to make obedient, respectful beings who will nourish and 
sustain us." Thus they spoke. 
Then was the creation and the formation. Of earth, of mud, they made [man's] flesh. But they 
saw that it was not good. It melted away, it was soft, did not move, had no strength, it fell 
down, it was limp, it could not move its head, its face fell to one side, its sight was blurred, it 
could not look behind. At first it spoke, but had no mind. Quickly it soaked in the water and 
could not stand. 
And the Creator and the Maker said: "Let us try again because our creatures will not be able 
to walk nor multiply. Let us consider this," they said. 
Then they broke up and destroyed their work and their creation. And they said: "What shall 
we do to perfect it, in order that our worshipers, our invokers, will be successful?" 
Thus they spoke when they conferred again: "Let us say again to Xpiyacoc, Xmucané, 
Hunahpú-Vuch, Hunahpú-Utiú: 'Cast your lot again. Try to create again.'" In this manner the 
Creator and the Maker spoke to Xpiyacoc and Xmucané. 
Then they spoke to those soothsayers, the Grandmother of the day, the Grandmother of the 
Dawn, as they were called by the Creator and the Maker, and whose names were Xpiyacoc 
and Xmucané. 
And said Huracán, Tepeu, and Gucumatz when they spoke to the soothsayer, to the Maker, 
who are the diviners: "You must work together and find the means so that man, whom we 
shall make, man, whom we are going to make, will nourish and sustain us, invoke and 
remember us. 
"Enter, then, into council, grandmother, grandfather, our grandmother, our grandfather, 
Xpiyacoc, Xmucané, make light, make dawn. have us invoked, have us adored, have us 
remembered by created man, by made man, by mortal man. Thus be it done. 
"Let your nature be known, Hunahpú-Vuch, Hunahpú-Utiú, twice-mother, twice-father, Nim-
Ac, Nima-Tziís, the master of emeralds, the worker in jewels, the sculptor, the carver, the 
maker of beautiful plates, the maker of green gourds, the master of resin, the master Toltecat, 
grandmother of the sun, grandmother of dawn, as you will be called by our works and our 
creatures. 
"Cast the lot with your grains of corn and tzité. Do it thus and we shall know if we are to 
make, or carve his mouth and eyes out of wood." Thus the diviners were told. 
They went down at once to make their divination, and cast their lots with the corn and the 
tzité. "Fate! Creature!" said an old woman and an old man. And this old man was the one who 
cast the lots with Tzité, the one called Xpiyacoc. And the old woman was the diviner, the 
maker, called Chiracán Xmucané.  
Beginning the divination, they said: "Get together, grasp each other! Speak, that we may 
hear." They said, "Say if it is well that the wood be got together and that it be carved by the 
Creator and the Maker, and if this [man of wood] is he who must nourish and sustain us when 
there is light when it is day! 
"Thou, corn; thou, tzité; thou, fate; thou, creature; get together, take each other," they said to 
the corn, to the tzité, to fate, to the creature. "Come to sacrifice here, Heart of Heaven; do not 
punish Tepeu and Gucumatz!"  
Then they talked and spoke the truth: "Your figures of wood shall come out well; they shall 
speak and talk on earth." 
"So may it be," they answered when they spoke. 
And instantly the figures were made of wood. They looked like men, talked like men, and 
populated the surface of the earth. 
They existed and multiplied; they had daughters, they had sons, these wooden figures; but 
they did not have souls, nor minds, they did not remember their Creator, their Maker; they 
walked on all fours, aimlessly. 
They no longer remembered the Heart of Heaven and therefore they fell out of favor. It was 
merely a trial, an attempt at man. At first they spoke, but their face was without expression; 
their feet and hands had no strength; they had no blood, nor substance, nor moisture, nor 
flesh; their cheeks were dry, their feet and hands were dry, and their flesh was yellow. 
Therefore, they no longer thought of their Creator nor their Maker, nor of those who made 
them and cared for them.  
These were the first men who existed in great numbers on the face of the earth.
